website/src/pages/talks.md, before:

---
title: "Talks"
keywords: [hudi, talks, presentation]
last_modified_at: 2019-12-31T15:59:57-04:00
---
# Talks & Presentations

1. ["Hoodie: Incremental processing on Hadoop at Uber"](https://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/strata-ca/public/schedule/detail/56511) -  By Vinoth Chandar & Prasanna Rajaperumal
   Mar 2017, Strata + Hadoop World, San Jose, CA

2. ["Hoodie: An Open Source Incremental Processing Framework From Uber"](http://www.dataengconf.com/hoodie-an-open-source-incremental-processing-framework-from-uber) - By Vinoth Chandar.
   Apr 2017, DataEngConf, San Francisco, CA [Slides](https://www.slideshare.net/vinothchandar/hoodie-dataengconf-2017) [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Wudjc-v7CA)

3. ["Incremental Processing on Large Analytical Datasets"](https://spark-summit.org/2017/events/incremental-processing-on-large-analytical-datasets/) - By Prasanna Rajaperumal
   June 2017, Spark Summit 2017, San Francisco, CA. [Slides](https://www.slideshare.net/databricks/incremental-processing-on-large-analytical-datasets-with-prasanna-rajaperumal-and-vinoth-chandar) [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HS0lQX-cgo&feature=youtu.be)

4. ["Hudi: Unifying storage and serving for batch and near-real-time analytics"](https://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/strata-ny/public/schedule/detail/70937) - By Nishith Agarwal & Balaji Vardarajan
   September 2018, Strata Data Conference, New York, NY

5. ["Hudi: Large-Scale, Near Real-Time Pipelines at Uber"](https://databricks.com/session/hudi-near-real-time-spark-pipelines-at-petabyte-scale) - By Vinoth Chandar & Nishith Agarwal
   October 2018, Spark+AI Summit Europe, London, UK

6. ["Powering Uber's global network analytics pipelines in real-time with Apache Hudi"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1w3IpavhSWA) - By Ethan Guo & Nishith Agarwal, April 2019, Data Council SF19, San Francisco, CA.

7. ["Building highly efficient data lakes using Apache Hudi (Incubating)"](https://www.slideshare.net/ChesterChen/sf-big-analytics-20190612-building-highly-efficient-data-lakes-using-apache-hudi) - By Vinoth Chandar 
   June 2019, SF Big Analytics Meetup, San Mateo, CA

8. ["Apache Hudi (Incubating) - The Past, Present and Future Of Efficient Data Lake Architectures"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1FHhsvh70ZP6xXlHdVsAI0g__B_6Mpto5KQFlZ0b8-mM) - By Vinoth Chandar & Balaji Varadarajan
   September 2019, ApacheCon NA 19, Las Vegas, NV, USA
  
9. ["Insert, upsert, and delete data in Amazon S3 using Amazon EMR"](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=98662&csrftkn=YS67-AG7B-QIAV-ZZBK-E6TT-MD4Q-1HEP-747P) - By Paul Codding & Vinoth Chandar
   December 2019, AWS re:Invent 2019, Las Vegas, NV, USA  
       
10. ["Building Robust CDC Pipeline With Apache Hudi And Debezium"](https://www.slideshare.net/SyedKather/building-robust-cdc-pipeline-with-apache-hudi-and-debezium) - By Pratyaksh, Purushotham, Syed and Shaik December 2019, Hadoop Summit Bangalore, India

11. ["Using Apache Hudi to build the next-generation data lake and its application in medical big data"](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1dmH2kWJF69PNdifPp37QBgjivOHaSLDn) - By JingHuang & Leesf March 2020, Apache Hudi & Apache Kylin Online Meetup, China

12. ["Building a near real-time, high-performance data warehouse based on Apache Hudi and Apache Kylin"](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1Pk_WdFxfEZxMMfAOn0R8-m3ALkcN6G9e) - By ShaoFeng Shi March 2020, Apache Hudi & Apache Kylin Online Meetup, China

13. ["Building large scale, transactional data lakes using Apache Hudi"](https://berlinbuzzwords.de/session/building-large-scale-transactional-data-lakes-using-apache-hudi) - By Nishith Agarwal, June 2020, Berlin Buzzwords 2020.

14. ["Apache Hudi - Design/Code Walkthrough Session for Contributors"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N2eDfU_rQ_U) - By Vinoth Chandar, July 2020, Hudi community.

15. ["PrestoDB and Apache Hudi"](https://youtu.be/nA3rwOdmm3A) - By Bhavani Sudha Saktheeswaran and Brandon Scheller, Aug 2020, PrestoDB Community Meetup.

16. ["DC_THURS : Apache Hudi w/ Nishith Agarwal & Vinoth Chandar"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNxrsjhI-9w), Aug 2020, Online discussion/Q&A with DataCouncil Founder

17. ["Panel Discussion on Presto Ecosystem"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsFSM2Z4kPs) - By Vinoth Chandar, Sep 2020, PrestoCon ["panel"](https://prestocon2020.sched.com/event/dgyw).

18. ["Next Generation Data lakes using Apache Hudi"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1y-ryRwCdTbqQHGr_bn3lxM_B8L1L5nsZOIXlJsDl_wU/edit?usp=sharing) - By Balaji Varadarajan and Sivabalan Narayanan, Sep 2020, ["ApacheCon"](https://www.apachecon.com/)

19. ["Building Large-Scale, Transactional Data Lakes using Apache Hudi"](https://www.dbta.com/DataSummit/Fall2020/Agenda.aspx) - By Nishith Agarwal, Data Summit 2020

20. ["Landing practice of Apache Hudi in T3go"](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ULVPkjynaw-07wsutLcZm-4rVXf8E8N8/view?usp=sharing) - By VinoYang and XianghuWang, November 2020, Qcon.

21. ["Meetup talk by Nishith Agarwal"](https://www.meetup.com/UberEvents/events/274924537/) - Uber Data Platforms Meetup, Dec 2020

22. ["Apache Hudi learning series: Understanding Hudi internals"](https://www.slideshare.net/NishithAgarwal3/hudi-architecture-fundamentals-and-capabilities) - By Abhishek Modi, Balajee Nagasubramaniam, Prashant Wason, Satish Kotha, Nishith Agarwal, Feb 2021, Uber Meetup

23. ["Apache Hudi Meetup at Uber with talks from AWS, CityStorageSystems & Uber"](https://youtu.be/iXBInMLbjo0) - By Udit Mehrotra, Wenning Ding (AWS), Alexander Filipchik (CityStorageSystems), Prashant Wason, Satish Kotha (Uber), Feb 2021

24. ["Apache Hudi: The Streaming Data Lake Platform"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1lVpbYV7qytAZPdwx4X9DD9ii0qFh7n9WGKJ0XQ4VpIs/edit?usp=sharing) - By Nishith Agarwal, Sivabalan Narayanan, 
Data Summit Connect, May, 2021
    
25. ["Change Data Capture to Data lakes using Apache Pulsar/Hudi"](https://www.slideshare.net/streamnative/change-data-capture-to-data-lakes-using-apache-pulsar-and-apache-hudi-pulsar-summit-na-2021) - By Vinoth Chandar, Pulsar Summit North America, June 2021. ["Video link"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWpnVIgcAXw) 

26. ["Apache Hudi: Large Scale Data Systems with Vinoth Chandar"](https://softwareengineeringdaily.com/2021/05/13/apache-hudi-large-scale-data-systems-with-vinoth-chandar/) - By Vinoth Chandar. SE Daily Podcast. May, 2021

27. ["Meet the creator of Apache hudi: Vinoth Chandar"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XcaFaJR4IVk) - By Vinoth Chandar. Presto Con Day, 2021

28. ["Presto Eco system Panel Discussion"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsFSM2Z4kPs) - By Vinoth Chandar, Dipti Borkar, Nezih Yigitbasi, Maxime Beauchemin, Kishore. Presto Con, 2021

29. ["Speeding up Presto Queries Using Apache Hudi Clustering"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1WSg2aiCwDQ) - By Satish Kotha and Nishith Agarwal. Presto Con, March 2021

30. ["Building a Large-scale Transactional Data Lake Using Apache Hudi"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J6EcGiExx7M) - By Satish Kotha, AICamp

31. ["Apache Hudi table format, Purpose-built for low latency data lake use-cases"](https://www.dremio.com/subsurface/introducing-the-apache-hudi-table-format-purpose-built-for-low-latency-data-lake-use-cases/) - By Nishith Agarwal and Sivabalan Narayanan. July, 2021

32. ["Community round table: Open data lakes with Presto, Hudi and Aws - the next generation of analytics"](https://ahana.io/videos-presentations/roundtable-presto-hudi-aws/) - By Vinoth chandar, Roy Hasson, Dipti Borkar, Coordinated by Eric Kavanagh. July, 2021

33. ["DataEngineering Podcast: Charting A Path For Streaming Data To Fill Your Data Lake With Hudi"](https://www.dataengineeringpodcast.com/hudi-streaming-data-lake-episode-209/) - By Vinoth Chandar. Aug, 2021

34. ["Streaming Data Lakes using Kafka Connect + Apache Hudi"](https://www.slideshare.net/HostedbyConfluent/streaming-data-lakes-using-kafka-connect-apache-hudi-vinoth-chandar-apache-software-foundation) - Balaji Varadarajan and Vinoth Chandar. Sep 27, 2021.
    
35. ["Code/Design walk through"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ezDbR_4FqU) - By Vinoth Chandar. Oct 8, 2021

36. ["Apache Hudi - The Data lake platform"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGcT6RPjez4) - By Vinoth Chandar. Oct 11, 2021

37. ["Building Open Data Lakes on AWS with Debezium and Apache Hudi"](https://programmaticponderings.com/2021/10/31/demonstration-building-open-data-lakes-on-aws-with-debezium-and-apache-hudi/) - By Gary A. Stafford. Oct 31, 2021

38. ["Apache Hudi Meetup at Uber with talks from Disney, Walmart & Uber"](https://youtu.be/ZamXiT9aqs8) - By Vinay Patil (Disney+Hotstar), Samuel Guleff (Walmart), Surya Prasanna Yalla, Meenal Binwade (Uber), Jan 2022

39. ["Apache Hudi Meetup at Uber with talks from Philips, Moveworks & Uber (including Hudi OSS roadmap 2022)"](https://youtu.be/8Q0kM-emMyo) - By Felix Kizhakkel Jose (Philips), Bhavani Sudha (Moveworks), Prashant Wason (Uber), March 2022

40. ["Apache Hudi with Vinoth Chandar"](https://softwareengineeringdaily.com/2022/03/08/apache-hudi-with-vinoth-chandar/) By Software Engineering Daily. Mar 5, 2022

41. ["PrestoDB and Apache Hudi for the Lakehouse"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3zQJR-IGH0Y&list=PLJVeO1NMmyqXHoLuUJtulMDU0yBgSL0GH&index=11) - By Sagar Sumit and Bhavani Sudha Saktheeswaran. PrestoCon Day. Jul 21, 2022

Commit message:

[DOCS] Add Presto Tech Talk June 2022 to talks page

website/src/pages/talks.md, after:

---
title: "Talks"
keywords: [hudi, talks, presentation]
last_modified_at: 2019-12-31T15:59:57-04:00
---
# Talks & Presentations

1. ["Hoodie: Incremental processing on Hadoop at Uber"](https://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/strata-ca/public/schedule/detail/56511) -  By Vinoth Chandar & Prasanna Rajaperumal
   Mar 2017, Strata + Hadoop World, San Jose, CA

2. ["Hoodie: An Open Source Incremental Processing Framework From Uber"](http://www.dataengconf.com/hoodie-an-open-source-incremental-processing-framework-from-uber) - By Vinoth Chandar.
   Apr 2017, DataEngConf, San Francisco, CA [Slides](https://www.slideshare.net/vinothchandar/hoodie-dataengconf-2017) [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Wudjc-v7CA)

3. ["Incremental Processing on Large Analytical Datasets"](https://spark-summit.org/2017/events/incremental-processing-on-large-analytical-datasets/) - By Prasanna Rajaperumal
   June 2017, Spark Summit 2017, San Francisco, CA. [Slides](https://www.slideshare.net/databricks/incremental-processing-on-large-analytical-datasets-with-prasanna-rajaperumal-and-vinoth-chandar) [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HS0lQX-cgo&feature=youtu.be)

4. ["Hudi: Unifying storage and serving for batch and near-real-time analytics"](https://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/strata-ny/public/schedule/detail/70937) - By Nishith Agarwal & Balaji Vardarajan
   September 2018, Strata Data Conference, New York, NY

5. ["Hudi: Large-Scale, Near Real-Time Pipelines at Uber"](https://databricks.com/session/hudi-near-real-time-spark-pipelines-at-petabyte-scale) - By Vinoth Chandar & Nishith Agarwal
   October 2018, Spark+AI Summit Europe, London, UK

6. ["Powering Uber's global network analytics pipelines in real-time with Apache Hudi"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1w3IpavhSWA) - By Ethan Guo & Nishith Agarwal, April 2019, Data Council SF19, San Francisco, CA.

7. ["Building highly efficient data lakes using Apache Hudi (Incubating)"](https://www.slideshare.net/ChesterChen/sf-big-analytics-20190612-building-highly-efficient-data-lakes-using-apache-hudi) - By Vinoth Chandar 
   June 2019, SF Big Analytics Meetup, San Mateo, CA

8. ["Apache Hudi (Incubating) - The Past, Present and Future Of Efficient Data Lake Architectures"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1FHhsvh70ZP6xXlHdVsAI0g__B_6Mpto5KQFlZ0b8-mM) - By Vinoth Chandar & Balaji Varadarajan
   September 2019, ApacheCon NA 19, Las Vegas, NV, USA
  
9. ["Insert, upsert, and delete data in Amazon S3 using Amazon EMR"](https://www.portal.reinvent.awsevents.com/connect/sessionDetail.ww?SESSION_ID=98662&csrftkn=YS67-AG7B-QIAV-ZZBK-E6TT-MD4Q-1HEP-747P) - By Paul Codding & Vinoth Chandar
   December 2019, AWS re:Invent 2019, Las Vegas, NV, USA  
       
10. ["Building Robust CDC Pipeline With Apache Hudi And Debezium"](https://www.slideshare.net/SyedKather/building-robust-cdc-pipeline-with-apache-hudi-and-debezium) - By Pratyaksh, Purushotham, Syed and Shaik December 2019, Hadoop Summit Bangalore, India

11. ["Using Apache Hudi to build the next-generation data lake and its application in medical big data"](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1dmH2kWJF69PNdifPp37QBgjivOHaSLDn) - By JingHuang & Leesf March 2020, Apache Hudi & Apache Kylin Online Meetup, China

12. ["Building a near real-time, high-performance data warehouse based on Apache Hudi and Apache Kylin"](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1Pk_WdFxfEZxMMfAOn0R8-m3ALkcN6G9e) - By ShaoFeng Shi March 2020, Apache Hudi & Apache Kylin Online Meetup, China

13. ["Building large scale, transactional data lakes using Apache Hudi"](https://berlinbuzzwords.de/session/building-large-scale-transactional-data-lakes-using-apache-hudi) - By Nishith Agarwal, June 2020, Berlin Buzzwords 2020.

14. ["Apache Hudi - Design/Code Walkthrough Session for Contributors"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N2eDfU_rQ_U) - By Vinoth Chandar, July 2020, Hudi community.

15. ["PrestoDB and Apache Hudi"](https://youtu.be/nA3rwOdmm3A) - By Bhavani Sudha Saktheeswaran and Brandon Scheller, Aug 2020, PrestoDB Community Meetup.

16. ["DC_THURS : Apache Hudi w/ Nishith Agarwal & Vinoth Chandar"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNxrsjhI-9w), Aug 2020, Online discussion/Q&A with DataCouncil Founder

17. ["Panel Discussion on Presto Ecosystem"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsFSM2Z4kPs) - By Vinoth Chandar, Sep 2020, PrestoCon ["panel"](https://prestocon2020.sched.com/event/dgyw).

18. ["Next Generation Data lakes using Apache Hudi"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1y-ryRwCdTbqQHGr_bn3lxM_B8L1L5nsZOIXlJsDl_wU/edit?usp=sharing) - By Balaji Varadarajan and Sivabalan Narayanan, Sep 2020, ["ApacheCon"](https://www.apachecon.com/)

19. ["Building Large-Scale, Transactional Data Lakes using Apache Hudi"](https://www.dbta.com/DataSummit/Fall2020/Agenda.aspx) - By Nishith Agarwal, Data Summit 2020

20. ["Landing practice of Apache Hudi in T3go"](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ULVPkjynaw-07wsutLcZm-4rVXf8E8N8/view?usp=sharing) - By VinoYang and XianghuWang, November 2020, Qcon.

21. ["Meetup talk by Nishith Agarwal"](https://www.meetup.com/UberEvents/events/274924537/) - Uber Data Platforms Meetup, Dec 2020

22. ["Apache Hudi learning series: Understanding Hudi internals"](https://www.slideshare.net/NishithAgarwal3/hudi-architecture-fundamentals-and-capabilities) - By Abhishek Modi, Balajee Nagasubramaniam, Prashant Wason, Satish Kotha, Nishith Agarwal, Feb 2021, Uber Meetup

23. ["Apache Hudi Meetup at Uber with talks from AWS, CityStorageSystems & Uber"](https://youtu.be/iXBInMLbjo0) - By Udit Mehrotra, Wenning Ding (AWS), Alexander Filipchik (CityStorageSystems), Prashant Wason, Satish Kotha (Uber), Feb 2021

24. ["Apache Hudi: The Streaming Data Lake Platform"](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1lVpbYV7qytAZPdwx4X9DD9ii0qFh7n9WGKJ0XQ4VpIs/edit?usp=sharing) - By Nishith Agarwal, Sivabalan Narayanan, 
Data Summit Connect, May, 2021
    
25. ["Change Data Capture to Data lakes using Apache Pulsar/Hudi"](https://www.slideshare.net/streamnative/change-data-capture-to-data-lakes-using-apache-pulsar-and-apache-hudi-pulsar-summit-na-2021) - By Vinoth Chandar, Pulsar Summit North America, June 2021. ["Video link"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MWpnVIgcAXw) 

26. ["Apache Hudi: Large Scale Data Systems with Vinoth Chandar"](https://softwareengineeringdaily.com/2021/05/13/apache-hudi-large-scale-data-systems-with-vinoth-chandar/) - By Vinoth Chandar. SE Daily Podcast. May, 2021

27. ["Meet the creator of Apache hudi: Vinoth Chandar"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XcaFaJR4IVk) - By Vinoth Chandar. Presto Con Day, 2021

28. ["Presto Eco system Panel Discussion"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsFSM2Z4kPs) - By Vinoth Chandar, Dipti Borkar, Nezih Yigitbasi, Maxime Beauchemin, Kishore. Presto Con, 2021

29. ["Speeding up Presto Queries Using Apache Hudi Clustering"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1WSg2aiCwDQ) - By Satish Kotha and Nishith Agarwal. Presto Con, March 2021

30. ["Building a Large-scale Transactional Data Lake Using Apache Hudi"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J6EcGiExx7M) - By Satish Kotha, AICamp

31. ["Apache Hudi table format, Purpose-built for low latency data lake use-cases"](https://www.dremio.com/subsurface/introducing-the-apache-hudi-table-format-purpose-built-for-low-latency-data-lake-use-cases/) - By Nishith Agarwal and Sivabalan Narayanan. July, 2021

32. ["Community round table: Open data lakes with Presto, Hudi and Aws - the next generation of analytics"](https://ahana.io/videos-presentations/roundtable-presto-hudi-aws/) - By Vinoth chandar, Roy Hasson, Dipti Borkar, Coordinated by Eric Kavanagh. July, 2021

33. ["DataEngineering Podcast: Charting A Path For Streaming Data To Fill Your Data Lake With Hudi"](https://www.dataengineeringpodcast.com/hudi-streaming-data-lake-episode-209/) - By Vinoth Chandar. Aug, 2021

34. ["Streaming Data Lakes using Kafka Connect + Apache Hudi"](https://www.slideshare.net/HostedbyConfluent/streaming-data-lakes-using-kafka-connect-apache-hudi-vinoth-chandar-apache-software-foundation) - Balaji Varadarajan and Vinoth Chandar. Sep 27, 2021.
    
35. ["Code/Design walk through"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ezDbR_4FqU) - By Vinoth Chandar. Oct 8, 2021

36. ["Apache Hudi - The Data lake platform"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGcT6RPjez4) - By Vinoth Chandar. Oct 11, 2021

37. ["Building Open Data Lakes on AWS with Debezium and Apache Hudi"](https://programmaticponderings.com/2021/10/31/demonstration-building-open-data-lakes-on-aws-with-debezium-and-apache-hudi/) - By Gary A. Stafford. Oct 31, 2021

38. ["Apache Hudi Meetup at Uber with talks from Disney, Walmart & Uber"](https://youtu.be/ZamXiT9aqs8) - By Vinay Patil (Disney+Hotstar), Samuel Guleff (Walmart), Surya Prasanna Yalla, Meenal Binwade (Uber), Jan 2022

39. ["Apache Hudi Meetup at Uber with talks from Philips, Moveworks & Uber (including Hudi OSS roadmap 2022)"](https://youtu.be/8Q0kM-emMyo) - By Felix Kizhakkel Jose (Philips), Bhavani Sudha (Moveworks), Prashant Wason (Uber), March 2022

40. ["Apache Hudi with Vinoth Chandar"](https://softwareengineeringdaily.com/2022/03/08/apache-hudi-with-vinoth-chandar/) By Software Engineering Daily. Mar 5, 2022

41. ["Presto Tech Talk: Optimizing table layout for Presto using Apache Hudi"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J1JuHVFdggs) - By Ethan Guo and Vinoth Chandar. Presto Meetup. Jun 23, 2022

42. ["PrestoDB and Apache Hudi for the Lakehouse"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3zQJR-IGH0Y&list=PLJVeO1NMmyqXHoLuUJtulMDU0yBgSL0GH&index=11) - By Sagar Sumit and Bhavani Sudha Saktheeswaran. PrestoCon Day. Jul 21, 2022
