.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

### Change Logs

_Describe context and summary for this change. Highlight if any code was copied._

### Impact

_Describe any public API or user-facing feature change or any performance impact._

### Risk level (write none, low medium or high below)

_If medium or high, explain what verification was done to mitigate the risks._

### Documentation Update

_Describe any necessary documentation update if there is any new feature, config, or user-facing change. If not, put "none"._

- _The config description must be updated if new configs are added or the default value of the configs are changed_
- _Any new feature or user-facing change requires updating the Hudi website. Please create a Jira ticket, attach the
  ticket number here and follow the [instruction](https://hudi.apache.org/contribute/developer-setup#website) to make
  changes to the website._

### Contributor's checklist

- [ ] Read through [contributor's guide](https://hudi.apache.org/contribute/how-to-contribute)
- [ ] Change Logs and Impact were stated clearly
- [ ] Adequate tests were added if applicable
- [ ] CI passed

Commit message:

chore: Update PR template and compliance check after deprecating JIRA (#13883)

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

### Describe the issue this Pull Request addresses

<!-- Either describe the issue inline here with motivation behind the changes 
     (or) link to an issue by including `Closes #<issue-number>` for context. 
     If this PR includes changes to the storage format, public APIs,
     or has breaking changes, use `!` (e.g., feat!: ...) -->

### Summary and Changelog

<!-- Short, plain-English summary of what users gain or what changed in behavior.
     Followed by a detailed log of all the changes. Highlight if any code was copied. -->

### Impact

<!-- Describe any public API or user-facing feature change or any performance impact. -->

### Risk Level

<!-- Accepted values: none, low, medium or high. Other than `none`, explain the risk.
     If medium or high, explain what verification was done to mitigate the risks. -->

### Documentation Update

<!-- Describe any necessary documentation update if there is any new feature, config, or user-facing change. If not, put "none".

- The config description must be updated if new configs are added or the default value of the configs are changed.
- Any new feature or user-facing change requires updating the Hudi website. Please follow the 
  [instruction](https://hudi.apache.org/contribute/developer-setup#website) to make changes to the website. -->

### Contributor's checklist

- [ ] Read through [contributor's guide](https://hudi.apache.org/contribute/how-to-contribute)
- [ ] Enough context is provided in the sections above
- [ ] Adequate tests were added if applicable
