rfc/rfc-91/rfc-91.md, before:

<!--
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
-->
# RFC-91: Storage-based lock provider using conditional writes

## Proposers

- @alexr17

## Approvers

 - @yihua
 - @danny0405

## Status

JIRA: [HUDI-9122](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HUDI-9122)

## Abstract

Currently in Hudi, distributed locking relies on external systems like Zookeeper, which add complexity and extra dependencies. This RFC introduces a storage-based implementation of the `LockProvider` interface that utilizes conditional writes in cloud storage platforms (such as GCS and AWS S3) to implement a native distributed locking mechanism for Hudi. By directly integrating lock management with cloud storage, this solution reduces operational overhead, and ensures robust coordination during concurrent writes.

## Background

There's a limitation of existing implementation in FileSystemBasedLockProvider (https://github.com/apache/hudi/pull/7440/files#r1061068482) and conditional writes of the file system / storage are required for the storage-based lock provider to operate properly. Hence, we cannot leverage existing implementations.

AWS S3 recently introduced conditional writes, and GCS and Azure storage already support them. This RFC leverages these features to implement a distributed lock provider for Hudi using a leader election algorithm. In this approach, each process attempts an atomic conditional write to a file calculated using the table base path. The first process to succeed is elected leader and takes charge of exclusive operations. This method provides a straightforward, reliable locking mechanism without the need for additional distributed system.

## Implementation

This design implements a leader election algorithm for Apache Hudi using a single lock file per table stored in .hoodie folder. Each table’s lock is represented by a JSON file with the following fields:
- owner: A unique UUID identifying the lock provider instance.
- expiration: A UTC timestamp indicating when the lock expires.
- expired: A boolean flag marking the lock as released.
Example lock file path: `s3://bucket/table/.hoodie/.locks/table_lock.json`.

### Diagram

![DFS-based Locking Service w/Conditional Writes](./dfs-locking-diagram.png)

Each `LockProvider` must implement `tryLock()` and `unlock()` however we also need to do our own lock renewal, therefore this implementation also has `renewLock()`. The implementation will import a service using reflection which writes to S3/GCS/Azure based on the provided location to write the locks. This ensures the main logic for conditional writes is shared regardless of the underlying storage.

`tryLock()`: guarantees that only one process can acquire the lock using the conditional write
- No Existing Lock: If the lock file doesn’t exist, a new lock file is created with the current instance’s details using a conditional write that only succeeds if the file is absent.
- Existing Lock – Not Expired: If a valid (non-expired) lock exists, the process refrains from taking the lock.
- Existing Lock – Expired: If the lock file exists but is expired, this is overwritten with a new lock file payload using conditional writes. This write has a precondition based on the current file’s unique tag from cloud storage to ensure the write succeeds only if no other process has updated it in the meantime. If another process manages to overwrite the lock file first, a 412 precondition failure will return and the lock will not be acquired.

`renewLock()`:  periodically extends the lock’s expiration (the heartbeat) to continue holding the lock if allowed.
- Update the lock file’s expiration using a conditional write that verifies the unique tag from the current lock state. If the tag does not match, the renewal fails, indicating that the lock has been lost.
- This process will continue to retry until the lock expiration and someone else will be able to acquire the lock.

`unlock()`: safely releases the lock.
- Update the existing lock file to mark it as expired. This update is performed with a conditional write that ensures the operation is only executed if the file’s unique tag still matches the one held by the lock owner. We do not delete the lock file, as S3 does not support conditional deletes.

### Heartbeat Manager

Once a lock is acquired, a dedicated heartbeat task periodically calls renewLock() (typically every 30 seconds) to extend the expiration. This ensures the lock remains valid as long as the owning process (thread) is active. The heartbeat manager oversees this process, ensuring no other updates occur concurrently on the lock file. Each lock provider has one heartbeat manager with a single executor thread.

### Edge cases
- If the thread which acquired the lock dies, we stop the heartbeat.
- If the renewal fails past the expiration, we log an error, and stop the heartbeat. Other Hudi lock provider implementations are susceptible to this behavior. If a writer somehow loses access to Zookeeper, there is no way to tell the writer to exit gracefully.
- If we are unable to start the heartbeat (renewal) we throw HoodieLockException and the lock is immediately released.
- Clock drift: we allow for a maximum of 500ms of clock drift between nodes. A requirement of this lock provider is that all writers competing for the same lock must be writing from the same cloud provider (AWS/Azure/GCP).
  - This will not be configurable at this time. If a storage-specific implementation needs to customize this the config can be added at that time but it should never go below 500ms.

### New Hudi configs

- `hoodie.write.lock.storage.heartbeat.poll.secs`: default 30 sec, how often to renew each lock.
- `hoodie.write.lock.storage.validity.timeout.secs`: default 300 sec (5 min), how long each lock is valid for.
Also requires `hoodie.base.path`, if this does not exist it should fail.

The heartbeat should always be at minimum a factor 10 less than the timeout to ensure enough retries exist to acquire the heartbeat.

### Cloud Provider Specific Details

We will make the conditional write implementation pluggable so each cloud provider's conditional write logic can be added uniquely. For libraries like Hadoop and OpenDAL, conditional writes are on the verge of being supported in java, but not at this time, so we will default to using the client libraries.

### AWS/S3

- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/conditional-requests.html
- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_PutObject.html

When we create the new lock file in tryLock we will use the If-None-Match precondition. From AWS docs:
- *Uploads the object only if the object key name does not already exist in the bucket specified. Otherwise, Amazon S3 returns a 412 Precondition Failed error. If a conflicting operation occurs during the upload S3 returns a 409 ConditionalRequestConflict response. On a 409 failure you should retry the upload. Expects the '\*' (asterisk) character.*

#### Etags

- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_Object.html

Etags are unique hashes of the contents of the object. Since our payload has a unique owner uuid, as long as the expiration (which is calculated by System.currentTimeMillis()) changes across requests for the same node, the Etag will change (otherwise the request would return 304 instead of 201/202).

When we overwrite an existing file in any of the methods, we will use the If-Match precondition. From AWS docs:
- *Uploads the object only if the ETag (entity tag) value provided during the WRITE operation matches the ETag of the object in S3. If the ETag values do not match, the operation returns a 412 Precondition Failed error. If a conflicting operation occurs during the upload S3 returns a 409 ConditionalRequestConflict response. On a 409 failure you should fetch the object's ETag and retry the upload. Expects the ETag value as a string.*

#### GCP/GCS

- https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/request-preconditions
- https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/metadata#generation-number

GCS has ETags, but they also have generation numbers, which are even better, and work for more use cases. Our current implementation already uses them, so they do not need further validation.

When we create the new lock file in tryLock we will use generationMatch(0). From GCP docs:
- *Passing the if_generation_match parameter to a method which retrieves a blob resource (e.g., Blob.reload) or modifies the blob (e.g., Blob.update) makes the operation conditional on whether the blob’s current generation matches the given value. As a special case, passing 0 as the value for if_generation_match makes the operation succeed only if there are no live versions of the blob.*

We can use the same logic for preconditions with overwrite operations using the currently stored lock file's generation number.

## Rollout/Adoption Plan

 - What impact (if any) will there be on existing users?
   - None 
 - If we are changing behavior how will we phase out the older behavior?
   - N/A
 - If we need special migration tools, describe them here.
   - N/A
 - When will we remove the existing behavior
   - N/A

## Test Plan

We can write normal junit tests using testcontainers with GCS and S3 to simulate edge cases and general contention. Further adhoc testing will include the following scenarios:

### Unit tests

We will add some high contention, high usage unit tests that create hundreds of threads to try and acquire locks simultaneously on the testcontainers to simulate load and contention. We can also use thread-unsafe structures like Arraylists to ensure concurrent modifications do not occur.

### High-Frequency Commit and Table Service Test

Run a long-running streaming ingestion process that continuously performs inserts, updates, and deletes. Ensure that frequent commits occur while table services like compaction and clustering operate concurrently. This test will help verify that the lock provider can handle overlapping operations without causing excessive delays or lock contention.

### Concurrent SQL and Spark Operations Test

While the streaming ingestion is active, execute multiple Spark jobs and SQL operations (including inserts, updates, and deletes) against the same Hudi table. This scenario is designed to simulate a mixed workload and to confirm that the lock provider maintains a stable baseline commit latency, prevents deadlocks, and handles high levels of concurrency without impacting overall performance.

### Long-Running Stream Stability Test

Initiate one or more continuous streaming processes that run for an extended period (few days). Monitor these processes for issues such as connection leaks, resource exhaustion, or performance degradation over time. Periodic consistency checks during this test will ensure that the data remains intact and that commit operations continue to perform reliably.

### Data Integrity and Consistency Verification

After running the above tests, perform validation queries to verify that key fields and preCombine values remain consistent throughout the ingestion process. This step ensures that the lock provider does not introduce any data discrepancies, even under heavy commit loads and concurrent operations.

### Monitoring and Metrics Analysis

Throughout all tests, track key performance metrics such as commit latency, throughput, and lock wait times. Monitoring resource utilization (CPU, memory, and network usage) is also essential to determine if the lock provider introduces any significant overhead or bottlenecks.

Commit message:

update LP rfc with new scenario

rfc/rfc-91/rfc-91.md, after:

<!--
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
  contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
  this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
  The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
  (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
  the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
-->
# RFC-91: Storage-based lock provider using conditional writes

## Proposers

- @alexr17

## Approvers

 - @yihua
 - @danny0405

## Status

JIRA: [HUDI-9122](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HUDI-9122)

## Abstract

Currently in Hudi, distributed locking relies on external systems like Zookeeper, which add complexity and extra dependencies. This RFC introduces a storage-based implementation of the `LockProvider` interface that utilizes conditional writes in cloud storage platforms (such as GCS and AWS S3) to implement a native distributed locking mechanism for Hudi. By directly integrating lock management with cloud storage, this solution reduces operational overhead, and ensures robust coordination during concurrent writes.

## Background

There's a limitation of existing implementation in FileSystemBasedLockProvider (https://github.com/apache/hudi/pull/7440/files#r1061068482) and conditional writes of the file system / storage are required for the storage-based lock provider to operate properly. Hence, we cannot leverage existing implementations.

AWS S3 recently introduced conditional writes, and GCS and Azure storage already support them. This RFC leverages these features to implement a distributed lock provider for Hudi using a leader election algorithm. In this approach, each process attempts an atomic conditional write to a file calculated using the table base path. The first process to succeed is elected leader and takes charge of exclusive operations. This method provides a straightforward, reliable locking mechanism without the need for additional distributed system.

## Implementation

This design implements a leader election algorithm for Apache Hudi using a single lock file per table stored in .hoodie folder. Each table’s lock is represented by a JSON file with the following fields:
- owner: A unique UUID identifying the lock provider instance.
- expiration: A UTC timestamp indicating when the lock expires.
- expired: A boolean flag marking the lock as released.
Example lock file path: `s3://bucket/table/.hoodie/.locks/table_lock.json`.

### Diagram

![DFS-based Locking Service w/Conditional Writes](./dfs-locking-diagram.png)

Each `LockProvider` must implement `tryLock()` and `unlock()` however we also need to do our own lock renewal, therefore this implementation also has `renewLock()`. The implementation will import a service using reflection which writes to S3/GCS/Azure based on the provided location to write the locks. This ensures the main logic for conditional writes is shared regardless of the underlying storage.

`tryLock()`: guarantees that only one process can acquire the lock using the conditional write
- No Existing Lock: If the lock file doesn’t exist, a new lock file is created with the current instance’s details using a conditional write that only succeeds if the file is absent.
- Existing Lock – Not Expired: If a valid (non-expired) lock exists, the process refrains from taking the lock.
- Existing Lock – Expired: If the lock file exists but is expired, this is overwritten with a new lock file payload using conditional writes. This write has a precondition based on the current file’s unique tag from cloud storage to ensure the write succeeds only if no other process has updated it in the meantime. If another process manages to overwrite the lock file first, a 412 precondition failure will return and the lock will not be acquired.

`renewLock()`:  periodically extends the lock’s expiration (the heartbeat) to continue holding the lock if allowed.
- Update the lock file’s expiration using a conditional write that verifies the unique tag from the current lock state. If the tag does not match, the renewal fails, indicating that the lock has been lost.
- This process will continue to retry until the lock expiration and someone else will be able to acquire the lock.

`unlock()`: safely releases the lock.
- Update the existing lock file to mark it as expired. This update is performed with a conditional write that ensures the operation is only executed if the file’s unique tag still matches the one held by the lock owner. We do not delete the lock file, as S3 does not support conditional deletes.

### Heartbeat Manager

Once a lock is acquired, a dedicated heartbeat task periodically calls renewLock() (typically every 30 seconds) to extend the expiration. This ensures the lock remains valid as long as the owning process (thread) is active. The heartbeat manager oversees this process, ensuring no other updates occur concurrently on the lock file. Each lock provider has one heartbeat manager with a single executor thread.

### Edge cases
- If the thread which acquired the lock dies, we stop the heartbeat.
- If the renewal fails past the expiration, we log an error, and stop the heartbeat. Other Hudi lock provider implementations are susceptible to this behavior. If a writer somehow loses access to Zookeeper, there is no way to tell the writer to exit gracefully.
- If we are unable to start the heartbeat (renewal) we throw HoodieLockException and the lock is immediately released.
- Clock drift: we allow for a maximum of 500ms of clock drift between nodes. A requirement of this lock provider is that all writers competing for the same lock must be writing from the same cloud provider (AWS/Azure/GCP).
  - This will not be configurable at this time. If a storage-specific implementation needs to customize this the config can be added at that time but it should never go below 500ms.

See rfc-91-2.md for detailed edge case handling of conditional write retries

### New Hudi configs

- `hoodie.write.lock.storage.heartbeat.poll.secs`: default 30 sec, how often to renew each lock.
- `hoodie.write.lock.storage.validity.timeout.secs`: default 300 sec (5 min), how long each lock is valid for.
Also requires `hoodie.base.path`, if this does not exist it should fail.

The heartbeat should always be at minimum a factor 10 less than the timeout to ensure enough retries exist to acquire the heartbeat.

### Cloud Provider Specific Details

We will make the conditional write implementation pluggable so each cloud provider's conditional write logic can be added uniquely. For libraries like Hadoop and OpenDAL, conditional writes are on the verge of being supported in java, but not at this time, so we will default to using the client libraries.

### AWS/S3

- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/conditional-requests.html
- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_PutObject.html

When we create the new lock file in tryLock we will use the If-None-Match precondition. From AWS docs:
- *Uploads the object only if the object key name does not already exist in the bucket specified. Otherwise, Amazon S3 returns a 412 Precondition Failed error. If a conflicting operation occurs during the upload S3 returns a 409 ConditionalRequestConflict response. On a 409 failure you should retry the upload. Expects the '\*' (asterisk) character.*

#### Etags

- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_Object.html

Etags are unique hashes of the contents of the object. Since our payload has a unique owner uuid, as long as the expiration (which is calculated by System.currentTimeMillis()) changes across requests for the same node, the Etag will change (otherwise the request would return 304 instead of 201/202).

When we overwrite an existing file in any of the methods, we will use the If-Match precondition. From AWS docs:
- *Uploads the object only if the ETag (entity tag) value provided during the WRITE operation matches the ETag of the object in S3. If the ETag values do not match, the operation returns a 412 Precondition Failed error. If a conflicting operation occurs during the upload S3 returns a 409 ConditionalRequestConflict response. On a 409 failure you should fetch the object's ETag and retry the upload. Expects the ETag value as a string.*

#### GCP/GCS

- https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/request-preconditions
- https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/metadata#generation-number

GCS has ETags, but they also have generation numbers, which are even better, and work for more use cases. Our current implementation already uses them, so they do not need further validation.

When we create the new lock file in tryLock we will use generationMatch(0). From GCP docs:
- *Passing the if_generation_match parameter to a method which retrieves a blob resource (e.g., Blob.reload) or modifies the blob (e.g., Blob.update) makes the operation conditional on whether the blob’s current generation matches the given value. As a special case, passing 0 as the value for if_generation_match makes the operation succeed only if there are no live versions of the blob.*

We can use the same logic for preconditions with overwrite operations using the currently stored lock file's generation number.

## Rollout/Adoption Plan

 - What impact (if any) will there be on existing users?
   - None 
 - If we are changing behavior how will we phase out the older behavior?
   - N/A
 - If we need special migration tools, describe them here.
   - N/A
 - When will we remove the existing behavior
   - N/A

## Test Plan

We can write normal junit tests using testcontainers with GCS and S3 to simulate edge cases and general contention.

### Unit tests

We will add some high contention, high usage unit tests that create hundreds of threads to try and acquire locks simultaneously on the testcontainers to simulate load and contention. We can also use thread-unsafe structures like Arraylists to ensure concurrent modifications do not occur.
