website/contribute/report-security-issues.md, before:

---
title: Report Security Issues
sidebar_position: 5
keywords: [ hudi, security]
toc: true
last_modified_at: 2019-12-30T15:59:57-04:00
---

## Reporting Security Issues

The Apache Software Foundation takes a rigorous standpoint in annihilating the security issues in its software projects. Apache Hudi is highly sensitive and forthcoming to issues pertaining to its features and functionality.

## Reporting Vulnerability

If you have apprehensions regarding Hudi's security or you discover vulnerability or potential threat, don’t hesitate to get in touch with the [Apache Security Team](http://www.apache.org/security/) by dropping a mail at [security@apache.org](mailto:security@apache.org). In the mail, specify the description of the issue or potential threat. You are also urged to recommend the way to reproduce and replicate the issue. The Hudi community will get back to you after assessing and analysing the findings.

**PLEASE PAY ATTENTION** to report the security issue on the security email before disclosing it on public domain.

## Vulnerability Handling

An overview of the vulnerability handling process is:

* The reporter reports the vulnerability privately to Apache.
* The appropriate project's security team works privately with the reporter to resolve the vulnerability.
* A new release of the Apache product concerned is made that includes the fix.
* The vulnerability is publically announced.

A more detailed description of the process can be found [here](https://www.apache.org/security/committers).

Commit message:

(docs) move report security issue page  (#13811)

website/contribute/report-security-issues.md, after:

---
title: Report Issues
sidebar_position: 5
keywords: [ hudi, security]
toc: true
last_modified_at: 2019-12-30T15:59:57-04:00
---

## Reporting HUDI Issues

If you encounter a bug, performance issue, or unexpected behavior while using Apache Hudi, please report it by creating a [Github Issues](https://github.com/apache/hudi/issues). Be sure to include a clear summary, steps to reproduce the issue, expected vs. actual behavior, relevant logs, configurations, and your Hudi and Spark versions. The more context you provide, the easier it is for the community to diagnose and address the problem efficiently.

## Reporting Security Issues

The Apache Software Foundation takes a rigorous standpoint in annihilating the security issues in its software projects. Apache Hudi is highly sensitive and forthcoming to issues pertaining to its features and functionality.

## Reporting Vulnerability

If you have apprehensions regarding Hudi's security or you discover vulnerability or potential threat, don’t hesitate to get in touch with the [Apache Security Team](http://www.apache.org/security/) by dropping a mail at [security@apache.org](mailto:security@apache.org). In the mail, specify the description of the issue or potential threat. You are also urged to recommend the way to reproduce and replicate the issue. The Hudi community will get back to you after assessing and analysing the findings.

**PLEASE PAY ATTENTION** to report the security issue on the security email before disclosing it on public domain.

## Vulnerability Handling

An overview of the vulnerability handling process is:

* The reporter reports the vulnerability privately to Apache.
* The appropriate project's security team works privately with the reporter to resolve the vulnerability.
* A new release of the Apache product concerned is made that includes the fix.
* The vulnerability is publically announced.

A more detailed description of the process can be found [here](https://www.apache.org/security/committers).
